Final Project: Solo Jazz Guitar and Electronics

I was interested in composing a piece where accompanying electronic instruments respond to the the notes and chords I play on guitar.

Although I recorded my guitar track first and then brought it into Max/MSP, the same piece could have been achieved in real time (if I had someone else to trigger electronics at the right time). I came up with a simple chord progression and arranged the piece on guitar first. I cleaned up the track a little bit in Ableton Live first, mainly to get rid of noise from my computer fan, and low rumbling noises that my computer mic tends to pick up.

The sigmund~ object is a key component to my piece. I analyze the incoming audio from the guitar for the 7 most prominent pitches, and manipulate these in an Odot bundle. After experiment with more partials, I found that using more than 10 produced too many dissonant notes. Seven seemed to give a good balance between chord tones and "surprise" tones. A new frame of analysis is triggered using the bonk~ onset detection object, with a 50ms delay to avoid analyzing the noisy attack of the incoming sound. I tuned the velocity threshold such that whenever a new guitar chord is played, it triggers new analysis.

The analysis is used by two other instruments: an FM bass and an FM lead. Both of these FM synthesizers use the same signal chain, which is a saw~ modulating a tri~. I mainly tuned the parameters of these synths by feel, and tried all of the permutations of modulator/carrier until I felt I had a rich enough timbre. Both FM synthesizers are then ring-modulated by a multiple of the fundamental frequency to add even more low-end to the sound.

The FM bass plays continuously, trying to simulate a walking bassline that you might encounter in a jazz song. A random melody is chosen from the analysis pitches, and the bass plays through it at a regular tempo. The FM lead also chooses random notes, but the rhythm is triggered by a MIDI keyboard input. Pressing any key on the keyboard chooses a new random note. I opted to control the rhythm manually, because I felt that a continuous melody would have been monotonous.

Overall, I thought the piece had some good and bad surprises. Choosing melody notes from the analysis of the guitar had a few pleasing moments, especially when a strong chord tone was chosen on a down beat. Other times, the analysis yields jarring, harsh sounds. Listening through the piece, it feels a bit like a duet where the electronic player is fumbling through some improv and occassionally hits a nice phrase. If I had more time to work on this piece I would like to generate the melody through a more sophisticated process, and automate more of the parameters that I tune by hand in the performance.